.TH scap-security-guide 8 "26 Jan 2013" "version 1"

.SH NAME
SCAP Security Guide - Delivers security guidance, baselines, and
associated validation mechanisms utilizing the Security Content
Automation Protocol (SCAP).


.SH DESCRIPTION
The project provides practical security hardening advice for Red Hat products,
and also links it to compliance requirements in order to ease deployment
activities, such as certification and accreditation. These include requirements
in the U.S. government (Federal, Defense, and Intelligence Community) as well
as of the financial services and health care industries. For example,
high-level and widely-accepted policies such as NIST 800-53 provides prose
stating that System Administrators must audit "privileged user actions," but do
not define what "privileged actions" are. The SSG bridges the gap between
generalized policy requirements and specific implementation guidance, in SCAP
formats to support automation whenever possible.

The projects homepage is located at:
https://www.open-scap.org/security-policies/scap-security-guide


.SH Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 PROFILES
The Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 SSG content is broken into 'profiles,' groupings
of security settings that correlate to a known policy. Available profiles are:

.I C2S
.RS
The C2S profile demonstrates compliance against the
U.S. Government Commercial Cloud Services (C2S) baseline.

This baseline was inspired by the Center for Internet Security
(CIS) Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 Benchmark, v1.1.0 - 04-02-2015.
For the SCAP Security Guide project to remain in compliance with
CIS' terms and conditions, specifically Restrictions(8), note
there is no representation or claim that the C2S profile will
ensure a system is in compliance or consistency with the CIS
baseline.
.RE

.I CS2
.RS
The CS2 is an example of a customized server profile.
.RE

.I CSCF-RHEL6-MLS
.RS
The CSCF RHEL6 MLS Core Baseline profile reflects the Centralized Super
Computing Facility (CSCF) baseline for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6. This baseline
has received government ATO through the ICD 503 process, utilizing the CNSSI 1253
cross domain overlay. This profile should be considered in active development.
Additional tailoring will be needed, such as the creation of RBAC roles
for production deployment.
.RE

.I common
.RS
The Common Profile for General-Purpose Systems profile contains items common to general-purpose desktop and server installations.
.RE

.I desktop
.RS
The Desktop Baseline profile is for a desktop installation of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.
.RE

.I fisma-medium-rhel6-server
.RS
A FISMA Medium profile for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6
.RE

.I ftp
.RS
A profile for FTP servers
.RE

.I nist-cl-il-al
.RS
The CNSSI 1253 Low/Low/Low Control Baseline for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 Profile
follows the Committee on National Security Systems Instruction (CNSSI) No. 1253,
"Security Categorization and Control Selection for National Security Systems"
on security controls to meet low confidentiality, low integrity, and low assurance."
.RE

.I pci-dss
.RS
The PCI-DSS v3 Control Baseline Profile for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 is a *draft*
profile for PCI-DSS v3
.RE

.I rht-ccp
.RS
The Red Hat Corporate Profile for Certified Cloud Providers (RH CCP) profile is a
*draft* SCAP profile for Red Hat Certified Cloud Providers.
.RE

.I server
.RS
The Server Baseline profile is for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 acting as a server.
.RE

.I standard
.RS
The Standard System Security Profile contains rules to ensure standard security baseline of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 system.
Regardless of your system's workload all of these checks should pass.
.RE

.I stig-rhel6-disa
.RS
The Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs) and the NSA Guides are the
configuration standards for DOD IA and IA-enabled devices/systems. Since 1998,
DISA Field Security Operations (FSO) has played a critical role enhancing the
security posture of DoD's security systems by providing the Security Technical
Implementation Guides (STIGs). This profile was created as a collaboration
effort between the National Security Agency, DISA FSO, and Red Hat.

As a result of the upstream/downstream relationship between the SCAP Security
Guide project and the official DISA FSO STIG baseline, users should expect
variance between SSG and DISA FSO content. For additional information relating
to STIGs, please refer to the DISA FSO webpage at http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/

While this profile is packaged by Red Hat as part of the SCAP Security Guide
package, please note that commercial support of this SCAP content is NOT
available. This profile is provided as example SCAP content with no
endorsement for suitability or production readiness. Support for this profile
is provided by the upstream SCAP Security Guide community on a best-effort
basis. The upstream project homepage is https://www.open-scap.org/security-policies/scap-security-guide.

This profile is being developed under the DoD consensus model to become a STIG in coordination with DISA FSO.
.RE

.I usgcb-rhel6-server
.RS
The purpose of the United States Government Configuration Baseline (USGCB)
initiative is to create security configuration baselines for Information
Technology products widely deployed across the federal agencies. The USGCB
baseline evolved from the Federal Desktop Core Configuration mandate. The
USGCB is a Federal government-wide initiative that provides guidance to
agencies on what should be done to improve and maintain an effective
configuration settings focusing primarily on security.

.B "NOTE: "
While the current content maps to USGCB requirements, it has NOT
been validated by NIST as of yet. This content should be considered
draft, we are highly interested in feedback.

For additional information relating to USGCB, please refer to the NIST
webpage at http://usgcb.nist.gov/usgcb_content.html.
.RE


.SH Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 PROFILES
The Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 SSG content is broken into 'profiles,' groupings of security settings that correlate to a known policy. Available profiles are:

.I C2S
.RS
The C2S profile demonstrates compliance against the
U.S. Government Commercial Cloud Services (C2S) baseline.

This baseline was inspired by the Center for Internet Security
(CIS) Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 Benchmark, v1.1.0 - 04-02-2015.
For the SCAP Security Guide project to remain in compliance with
CIS' terms and conditions, specifically Restrictions(8), note
there is no representation or claim that the C2S profile will
ensure a system is in compliance or consistency with the CIS
baseline.
.RE

.I cjis-rhel7-server
.RS
The Criminal Justice Information Services Security Policy is a *draft* profile for CJIS v5.4. The scope of this profile is to configure Red Hat Enteprise Linux 7 against the U. S. Department of Justice, FBI CJIS Security Policy.
.RE

.I common
.RS
The common  profile is intended to be used as a base, universal profile for
scanning of general-purpose Red Hat Enterprise Linux systems.
.RE

.I docker-host
.RS
The Standard Docker Host Security Profile contains rules to ensure standard
security baseline of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 system running the docker daemon.
This discussion is currently being held on open-scap-list@redhat.com and
scap-security-guide@lists.fedorahosted.org.
.RE

.I ospp-rhel7
.RS
This profile is developed in partnership with the
U.S. National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST), U.S. Department of
Defense, the National Security Agency, and Red Hat. The USGCB is intended
to be the core set of security related configuration settings by which all
federal agencies should comply.
.RE

.I pci-dss
.RS
The PCI-DSS v3 Control Baseline Profile for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 is a *draft*
profile for PCI-DSS v3
.RE

.I rht-ccp
.RS
The Red Hat Corporate Profile for Certified Cloud Providers (RH CCP) profile is a
*draft* SCAP profile for Red Hat Certified Cloud Providers.
.RE

.I standard
.RS
The Standard System Security Profile contains rules to ensure standard security baseline of Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 system.
Regardless of your system's workload all of these checks should pass.
.RE

.I stig-rhel7-disa
.RS
The DISA STIG for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 Server V1R1.

The Security Technical Implementation Guides (STIGs) and the NSA Guides are the
configuration standards for DOD IA and IA-enabled devices/systems. Since 1998,
DISA Field Security Operations (FSO) has played a critical role enhancing the
security posture of DoD's security systems by providing the Security Technical
Implementation Guides (STIGs). This profile was created as a collaboration
effort between the National Security Agency, DISA FSO, and Red Hat.

As a result of the upstream/downstream relationship between the SCAP Security
Guide project and the official DISA FSO STIG baseline, users should expect
variance between SSG and DISA FSO content. For additional information relating
to STIGs, please refer to the DISA FSO webpage at http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/

While this profile is packaged by Red Hat as part of the SCAP Security Guide
package, please note that commercial support of this SCAP content is NOT
available. This profile is provided as example SCAP content with no
endorsement for suitability or production readiness. Support for this profile
is provided by the upstream SCAP Security Guide community on a best-effort
basis. The upstream project homepage is https://www.open-scap.org/security-policies/scap-security-guide.

This profile is developed under the DoD consensus model to become a STIG in coordination with DISA FSO.
.RE

.I nist-800-171-cui
.RS
Unclassified Information in Non-federal Information Systems and Organizations (NIST 800-171)

From NIST 800-171, Section 2.2:
Security requirements for protecting the confidentiality of CUI in nonfederal information systems
and organizations have a well-defined structure that consists of: (i) a basic security requirements section;
and (ii) a derived security requirements section. The basic security requirements are obtained from FIPS
Publication 200, which provides the high-level and fundamental security requirements for federal information
and information systems. The derived security requirements, which supplement the basic security requirements,
are taken from the security controls in NIST Special Publication 800-53.

This profile configures Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7 to the NIST Special Publication 800-53 controls identified
for securing Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI).


.SH Fedora PROFILES
The Fedora SSG content is broken into 'profiles,' groupings of security settings that
correlate to a known policy. Currently available profile:

.I common
.RS
The common profile is intended to be used as a base, universal profile for
scanning of general-purpose Fedora systems.
.RE

.I standard
.RS
The Standard System Security Profile contains rules to ensure standard security
baseline of a Fedora system.
Regardless of your system's workload all of these checks should pass.
.RE


.SH EXAMPLES
To scan your system utilizing the OpenSCAP utility against the
ospp-rhel7 profile:

oscap xccdf eval --profile ospp-rhel7 \
--results /tmp/`hostname`-ssg-results.xml \
--report /tmp/`hostname`-ssg-results.html \
--oval-results \
/usr/share/xml/scap/ssg/content/ssg-rhel7-xccdf.xml
.PP
Additional details can be found on the projects wiki page:
https://www.github.com/OpenSCAP/scap-security-guide/wiki


.SH FILES
.I /usr/share/xml/scap/ssg/content
.RS
Houses SCAP content utilizing the following naming conventions:

.I CPE_Dictionaries:
ssg-{profile}-cpe-dictionary.xml

.I CPE_OVAL_Content:
ssg-{profile}-cpe-oval.xml

.I OVAL_Content:
ssg-{profile}-oval.xml

.I XCCDF_Content:
ssg-{profile}-xccdf.xml
.RE

.I /usr/share/doc/scap-security-guide/guides/
.RS
HTML versions of SSG profiles.
.RE


.SH STATEMENT OF SUPPORT
The SCAP Security Guide, an open source project jointly maintained by Red Hat
and the NSA, provides XCCDF and OVAL content for Red Hat technologies. As an open
source project, community participation extends into U.S. Department of Defense
agencies, civilian agencies, academia, and other industrial partners.

SCAP Security Guide is provided to consumers through Red Hat's Extended
Packages for Enterprise Linux (EPEL) repository. As such, SCAP Security Guide
content is considered "vendor provided."

Note that while Red Hat hosts the infrastructure for this project and
Red Hat engineers are involved as maintainers and leaders, there is no
commercial support contracts or service level agreements provided by Red Hat.

Support, for both users and developers, is provided through the SCAP Security
Guide community.

Homepage: https://www.open-scap.org/security-policies/scap-security-guide
.PP
Mailing List: https://lists.fedorahosted.org/mailman/listinfo/scap-security-guide


.SH DEPLOYMENT TO U.S. CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS
SCAP Security Guide content is considered vendor (Red Hat) provided content.
Per guidance from the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
U.S. Government programs are allowed to use Vendor produced SCAP content in absence
of "Governmental Authority" checklists. The specific NIST verbage:
http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/ncp/repository/glossary?cid=1#Authority


.SH DEPLOYMENT TO U.S. MILITARY SYSTEMS
DoD Directive (DoDD) 8500.1 requires that "all IA and IA-enabled IT products
incorporated into DoD information systems shall be configured in accordance
with DoD-approved security configuration guidelines" and tasks Defense
Information Systems Agency (DISA) to "develop and provide security configuration
guidance for IA and IA-enabled IT products in coordination with Director, NSA."
The output of this authority is the DISA Security Technical Implementation Guides,
or STIGs. DISA FSO is in the process of moving the STIGs towards the use
of the NIST Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) in order to "automate"
compliance reporting of the STIGs.

Through a common, shared vision, the SCAP Security Guide community enjoys
close collaboration directly with NSA, NIST, and DISA FSO. As stated in Section 1.1 of
the Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 STIG Overview, Version 1, Release 2, issued on 03-JUNE-2013:

"The consensus content was developed using an open-source project called SCAP
Security Guide. The project's website is https://www.open-scap.org/security-policies/scap-security-guide.
Except for differences in formatting to accomodate the DISA STIG publishing
process, the content of the Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 STIG should mirrot the SCAP Security Guide
content with only minor divergence as updates from multiple sources work through
the concensus process."

The DoD STIG for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 was released June 2013. Currently, the
DoD Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 STIG contains only XCCDF content and is available online:
http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/os/unix-linux/Pages/red-hat.aspx

Content published against the iase.disa.mil website is authoritative
STIG content. The SCAP Security Guide project, as noted in the STIG overview,
is considered upstream content. Unlike DISA FSO, the SCAP Security Guide project
does publish OVAL automation content. Individual programs and C&A evaluators
make program-level determinations on the direct usage of the SCAP Security Guide.
Currently there is no blanket approval.


.SH SEE ALSO
.B oscap(8)


.SH AUTHOR
Please direct all questions to the SSG mailing list:
https://lists.fedorahosted.org/mailman/listinfo/scap-security-guide
